.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH DDCTOOL 1 "15 December 2015"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
ddctool \- Query and change monitor settings
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ddctool
.RB [ "--display|-d"
.IR dispno ]
.RB [ "--bus|-b"
.IR busno ]
.RB [ "--adl" | "-a " 
.IR "adapter-index.display-index" ]
.RG [ "--usb" | "-U"
.IR "busnum.devicenum" ]
.RB [ "--edid" 
.IR "256 hex character EDID" ]
.RB [ "--model" | "-l"
.IR "model name" ]
.RB [ "--sn" | "-n" 
.IR "serial number" ]
.RB [ "-v|--verbose" ]
.RB [ -t | --terse ]
.RB [ "-p" | "--program" ]
.RB [ "-u" | "--show-unsupported" ]
.RB [ --ddc ]
.RB [ "-s" | "--stats" ]
.RB [ --trace 
.IR  trace-class ]
.RB [ "-V" | "--version" ]
.RB [ "h"  | "--help" ]
.BR detect " |  " listvcp  " | " capabilities " | " getvcp 
.RI [ "feature-code" | "feature-group" ]
.RB | setvcp 
.I  feature-code new-value
] |
.BR vcpinfo " "
.RI [ "feature-code" | "feature-group" "] | "
.B dumpvcp 
.RI [ filename ]
|
.BI "loadvcp " filename
] |
.BR environment " | " interrogate 



.\" ALT USING .SY .OP
.\" .SY
.\" .OP \-abcde
.\" .OP \-b busno
.\" .OP \-d|--display dispno
.\" command command-arguments
.\" .YS


.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBddctool\fP is used to query and change monitor settings.  

\fBddctool\fP communicates with monitors implementing MCCS (Monitor Control Command Set) using the DDC/CI protocol on the I2C bus.  Normally, the video driver for the monitor exposes the I2C bus as devices named /dev/i2c-n.  


Discussion of I2C, MCCS goes here.  Define VCP.


A particular use case for \fBddctool\fP is as part of color profile management.  
Monitor calibration is relative to the monitor color settings currently in effect, e.g. red gain.  
\fBddctool\fP allows color related settings to be saved at the time a monitor is calibrated, 
and then restored when the calibration is applied.


.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.


.\" .B ddctool
.\" .I command 
.\" .R [
.\" .I command-arguments
.\" .R ] [
.\" .I options
.\" .R ]

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BR "detect " "Report attached monitors"
.TP
\fBvcpinfo\fP [ \fIfeature-code\fP | \fIfeature-group\fP ]
Describe VCP feature codes that \fBddctool\fP knows how to interpret
.TP 
.B "capabilities "
Query the monitor's capabilities string 
.TP
\fBgetvcp\fP [ \fIfeature-code\fP | \fIfeature-group\fP ]
Report a single VCP feature value, or a group of feature values
.TP
.BI "setvcp " "feature-code new-value"
Set a single VCP feature value
.TP
.BI "dumpvcp " filename
Save color related VCP feature values in a file.
If no file name is specified, one is generated and the file is saved <describe location>
.TP 
.BI "loadvcp " filename
Set VCP feature values from a file.  The monitor to which the values will be applied is determined by the monitor identification stored in the file. 
If the monitor is not attached, nothing happens.
.TP
.B "environment "
Probe the \fBddctool\fP installation environment.
.TP
.B "interrogate "
Collect maximum information for problem diagnosis.
.TP
.B "chkusbmon "
Tests if hiddev device is a USB connected monitor, for use in udev rules.
.PP

.SH COMMAND ARGUMENTS

.I feature-code
.sp
A feature-code is specified by its 2 character hex feature number, with or without a leading "0x", e.g.
0x10, 10 
.sp 2
.I feature-group
.sp 2
The following are the most useful feature groups recognized.  For a complete list,  use the \fB--help\fP option.
.TP
.BR ALL
All feature codes understood by \fBddctool\fP
.TQ 
.B KNOWN
Scan all understood feature codes, but show only codes supported by the monitor
.TQ 
.B COLOR
Scan color related feature codes
.TQ
.B PROFILE 
Subset of color related feature codes that are saved and restored by \fBdumpvcp\fP and \fBloadvcp\fP
.TQ
.B SCAN
Scan all possible feature codes 0x00..0xff, except those known the be write-only
.PP
Feature group names can be abbreviated to the first 3 characters.  Case is ignored.  e.g. COL, pro


.I new-value
.sp
A number in the range 0..255



.\" .TP inserts a line before its output, .TQ does not 


.SH OPTIONS
Options for monitor selection.  If none are of these options are specified, the default is the first detected monitor.
Options \fB--model\fP and \fB--sn\fP must be specified together.
.TQ
.BR -d , "--display "
.I display-number 
logical display number (starting from 1)
.TQ
.BR "-b,--bus "
.I bus-number
I2C bus number
.TQ
.BI "-a,--adl " "adapterIndex.displayIndex"
ADL adapter and display indexes
.TQ
.BI "-U,--usb " "busnum.devicenum"
USB bus and device numbers
.TQ
.B -l,--model
model name
.TQ
.B -n,--sn
serial number.  (This is the "serial ascii" field from the EDID, not the binary serial number.)
.TQ 
\fB-e,--edid\fP
256 hex character representation of the 128 byte EDID.  Needless to say, this is intended for program use.

.PP

Options to control the amount and form of output.
.TQ
.B "-u, --show-unsupported"
Normally, \fBgetvcp\fP does not report unsupported features when querying a feature-group.  This option forces output. 
.TQ
.B "-t, --terse"
Show brief detail
.TQ
.B -v, --verbose
Show extended detail
.TQ
.BR "-p" , "--program"
Machine readable output format.  Not normally used.
.PP
Options for diagnostic output.
.TQ
.BR --stats " [" all | errors | tries | calls ]
Report execution statistics.  If no argument is specified, or ALL is specified, then all statistics are 
output.  
.br Specify this option multiple times to report multiple statistics groups.
.br
I2C bus communication is an inherently unreliable.  It is the responsibility of the program using the bus 
to manage retries in case of failure.  This option reports retry counts and various performance statistics.
.TQ
.B --ddc
Reports DDC protocol errors.  These may reflect I2C bus errors, or deviations by monitors from the MCCS specification.
.TQ
.BI "--trace " "trace-class"
Enable debug tracing for a trace class.  Valid values are: \fIbase\fP, i2c, adl, ddc, main, and the special value \fIall\fP. 
Some trace classes are more useful than others.
.br
Specify this option multiple times to enable multiple trace classes.
.PP
Options for program information.
.TQ
.BR -h , --help 
Show program help.
.TQ
.B "-V, --version"
Show program version.
.PP
Options to tune execution:
.TQ
.BI "--maxtries " "(max-read-tries, max-write-read-tries, max-multi-part-read-tries)"
Adjust the number of retries
.TQ
.B "-f, --force"
Do not check certain parameters. 

.SH EXECUTION ENVIRONMENT 


requires package i2c-dev

i2c permissions

.SH NVIDIA PROPRIETARY DRIVER

Some newer Nvidia cards (e.g. GTX660Ti) require special settings to properly enable I2C support.   If you are using this driver and \fBddcctool\fP does not 
work with your Nvidia card (TODO: Describe symptoms), you can try the following:

Copy file /usr/local/share/ddctool/data/90-nvidia-i2c.conf to directory /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d 

.B sudo cp /usr/local/share/ddctool/data/90-nvidia-i2c.conf /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d 

This file will work "out of the box" if you do not have an /etc/X11/xorg.conf file.   If you do, 
adjust the \fBIdentifier\fP value in the file to correspond to the value in the master xorg.conf file.

(Note that the above instructions assume that datadir was set to /usr/local/share when ddctool was installed.  YMMV)

.SH AMD PRORIETARY DRIVER

AMD's proprietary video driver \fBfglrx\fP does not expose the I2C bus.  Instead, it provides access to the bus through the
AMD Display Library, aka \fBADL\fP. 
Owing to copyright restrictions, the ADL header files are not distributed with the \fBddctool\fP source.  Additional steps are 
required to build \fBddctool\fP with \fBfglrx\fP support.

To see if your copy of \fBddctool\fP was built with \fBfglrx\fP support, issue the command:
.br
.B ddctool --version

ADL identifies monitors using an adapter-number/display-number pair.  To select a monitor using these numbers, specify the 
\fB--adl\fP option with a period separating the adapter-number and display-number, e.g.
.br
.B --adl 0.1


.SH VIRTUAL MACHINES

VirtualBox and VMware do not provide i2c emulation.  (qemu?)


.SH EXAMPLES
.\" What do .EX and .EE do?

.B ddctool detect
.sp 0
Identify all attached monitors.
.sp 4
.B ddctool getvcp supported
.sp 1
.br
Show all settings that the default monitor supports and that \fBddctool\fP understands.
.PP
.sp 0
.B ddctpp getvcp 10 --display 2
.br
Query the luminosity value of the second monitor. 

.B   ddctool setvcp 10 30 --bus 4
.sp 0
Set the luminosity value for the monitor on bus /dev/i2c-4. 

.B ddctool vcpinfo --verbose
.sp 0
Show detailed information about VCP features that \fBddctool\fP understands. 

.B ddctool interrogate > ~/ddctool.out 
.sp 0
Collect maximum information about monitor capabilities and the execution environment, and 
direct the output to a file.


.SH DIAGNOSTICS

Returns 0 on success, 1 on failure. 

Requesting help is regarded as success.

.\" .SH FILES



.SH SEE ALSO
.\" README file /usr/local/share/doc/ddctool/README.md
.\" The program is documented fully in
.\" .br
.\" /usr/local/share/doc/ddctool/html/index.html
.\" .PP
The project homepage: http://www.ddctool.com



.\" .SH NOTES


.\" .SH BUGS


.SH AUTHOR
Sanford Rockowitz (rockowitz at minsoft dot com)
.br
Copyright 2015\-2016 Sanford Rockowitz


